As a result of those Carnegie conferences, as I
indicated before, I came to know Roger Revell, and
because of my work at UCLA with Martin Johnson, I
came to have a pretty good association with
Scripps people, although I didn't really feel at
the time that I wanted to give up my summer work at
the laboratories at Corona del Mar, so I never
formally affiliated with them. But in 54, 55, I
took a year's leave, and I think that was the time I
got a Ford Fellowship, as a matter of fact. Yeah, I
got a Ford Fellowship at that time, the Ford
Foundation, and I wanted to go down to Scripps to
work on certain aspects of zooplankton that I felt
would be valuable as commercial-type organisms.
And it was then that a fellow who was president of a
company that I better not mention, because I've
never had clearance from that group, read about my
going on leave and some of the things I was
interested in. In
the Los Angeles Times, I read this article, and he
made arrangements to come and see me. He was
president of this company. He had a nice yacht, and
he had
some high-flung ideas of getting vitamins from
the sea. So I went to Scripps, established myself,
went out on the vessel, collected some samples,
began working, when this man appeared at the door
and said, I'm so-and-so, I'd like to talk with you.
Could you have lunch? So we went out and had lunch,
and it turns out he was a chemist from Columbia,
become the president of this company, and he
wanted to get vitamin A from the sea. And So I told
him I really didn't have that much interest in that
topic and didn't know much about it. Well, we got
along pretty well. So he said, well, what about
coming to Catalina on my yacht? And we'll discuss
this on the weekend. So I went over and had a nice set
of small boats. Had a lot of fun at Catalina Island
looking over marine specimens, which served me
well later because I had to aid NSF in picking a site
for the University of Southern California Marine
Laboratory over there. And I came to know that
coast fairly well, in part because of that
three-day weekend we spent over there. But he
finally prevailed upon me to read in this topic,
and agreed to pay me just for reading for him. It was
really kind of a silly arrangement, but it worked
out beautifully to supplement my salary, which
wasn't too great. And I provided him reports. And
then he asked me if I wouldn't establish an office
in his plant. And he had very nice offices, which I
did eventually. I got in touch with the Ford
Foundation, and said, I have had an opportunity to
develop a much more practical kind of problem than
I'd ever anticipated. Would it be all right with
you if I switch over to this? And after some time on
the phone, they said, why not? So I did. I then got
interested in Krill. These are euphausid
organisms in the Antarctic.
And the reason I did is because they had an
extremely high vitamin A content in the eyes. And
by the way, it also was the largest euphausid known
and still is. And so I thought, OK, perhaps this
will be fine. This might satisfy this gentleman's
needs. Well, it turns out that he got more and more
enthused every time I turned in a report. So he
said, I'm hiring a marine architect who will be
your associate. And what I want you to do is devise a
ship that will be ideal for collecting marine
organisms for this purpose, a research vessel.
And I want a real one. Well, we discovered a hull in
Long Beach Harbor, which might have been redone.
It was Howard Hughes' old yacht, the Oceanus.
Fantastic vessel, but not really too good for this
purpose. However, in 1950-51, the Danish
government had sent the Galatea around the world
on a deep-sea expedition It was led by Anton Bruhn,
who was at the
Copenhagen University, was curator of their
museum, and was himself an ichthyologist. He led
that expedition, which was noteworthy because of
many things, but one of them was that it dredged in
the deepest trench known in the Pacific. And it was
the first time that they had ever been able to get a
dredge that deep. And they brought up life,
definitely proved there was life in the deep sea,
in the deepest part of the sea. At any rate, the
Galatea, I learned, was up for sale in Copenhagen
Harbor. So I mentioned this to this man, the
vitaminologist, and he said, go. So the marine
architect and I decided we would go. Well, the
Galatea had the largest deep-sea winch then
available, and it had also a tapered cable. That
is, it was a very large cable to base, tapered to
very fine cable, so that they could have as many
miles of cable out as needed to get to the bottom
without the cable snapping under its own weight.
Roger Revell, who was then director of Scripps
Institution, and who had seen to it that I had
adequate space and everything at Scripps to work,
commissioned me through the United States Navy to
attempt to buy this winch and the cable. And so I
traveled under the aegis of more than one group, as
a matter of fact. The United States Navy gave me the
rank of an admiral, and I traveled anywhere on
orders for them in order to do this service. And I
had an excellent experience. However, I was in and
out of Scripps, and really, although Roger said, I
must give you the title of research associate,
which gives you a great deal of freedom. You can
represent us officially, but you don't have to do
anything. And so I became the first and maybe the
only research associate in Scripps. But I had a
magnificent experience. I came to know Anton
Bruhn very well and Gunnar Thorson. who was a
leading Danish biologist, marine biologist, and
came to be world recognized.
And later, of course, he invited me to go to his lab
to work at Elsinore, just outside Kronborg
Castle. It
was just outside the lab window.
But you see, one thing leads to another. But that
experience was excellent for me. I got to know many
of the then active scientists at Scripps, and
I got to know many of the scientists around the
world. Did you purchase the boat? I placed the
order for it. then resigned. I never saw it. They
got it, and he gave it, I believe, eventually to
Scripps. I don't remember what the name is now. No,
for many reasons I had to correct. He wanted me...
He came under the influence of Mr. Merck. Merck
Chemical. And ask him what he should do with his
business. He was getting to be alone in years and
making fantastic amounts of money. And Merck had
said that what you should do
was pick three men and gradually turn the business
over to those three men, stock and whatever. So he
called the three of us in individually and then
together and said, I picked you three to take over
my business. He was then 70. And he said, I now want
you to get used to
living a good life. And so he began giving us
retainers of 2,000 a week. Gave me a Cadillac, use
of his yacht, anything I wanted. Well, when I went
to Europe, I was to entertain the near great or the
great anywhere that I could, which we didn't do. I
wasn't geared to that kind of life. Nor was I geared
to the other. So I told him in a long letter from
Europe that when I came back, that I had discharged
what I said I would do. I had got plans through.
Stokkenwerft Shipyard in Hamburg, and I let It
would have been a nice life, you know, in a way. I
would have inherited quite a fortune. But I was
somebody he liked particularly. He looked upon me
as his son and stuff. But it wasn't the life. So.
What became of whatever research that there was
that you were supposed to be involved with? Well,
about all I did was write a paper, which was
published in Scientific American in 1958. and
which Scientific American told me the other day
has sold more than any other. They've sold 124,000
copies of that alphabet.
It was on whales, plankton, and man. Remember that
crazy thing? That appeared in an English text.
It's used in a freshman English reading book, as a
matter of fact. And it's been two or three times
published in various books. I don't know. It was
one of those things I thought was fascinating.
There's some mistakes in it, a lot of other things.
But at any rate, it worked out pretty
interestingly. But that was what I did, was
delivered a lecture. I was invited to give a
faculty lecture at Caltech one afternoon. And
they said they wanted something that the Caltech
people ordinarily didn't hear. So I decided to do
that. And I wrote this. Well, the kind of thing they
got then was, to a great extent, molecular kinds of
things. And so I decided to put that manuscript
together and
deliver a lecture on it. I was also writing it up. in
a little more technical vein. When I finished, a
man came up and said, Gerard Peel, who was a
publisher of Scientific Americans, a good friend
of mine, and he really ought to have that
manuscript. He said, that's something that ought
to be published. That's really interesting. So,
you know, they didn't have any referent against
which to judge it outside of the fact that this was
interesting to them. So I said, fine. Before long,
I got a call from Flanagan, who was the editor of
Scientific American, and said, I understand
you've got this. Would you mind sending that
manuscript to us? And I said, no. I'll send it. So I
sent it. In about two weeks, I got a check for $400.
And I said, good God. I didn't know Scientific
American paid for articles. So I got this check
with a letter saying, we're going to find a place
for this in the next year or so. We want it. Well, two
weeks later, I got a frantic call saying, where can
we get some artwork? We're going to put that
article in right now. That was in November of 58, I
think, and the thing came out in December issue, so
it went fast. Why, I don't know. But I then got calls
from all over the world about that. Is this thing
really edible? Is it good? Would it be useful? All
this kind of stuff. And from shrimpers down here,
afraid the shrimpers were going out, they wanted
to know could they take their shrimp fleets and go
down there and get these things. So it went. And the
last call was from Jacques-Yves Cousteau asking
where he could get krill in largest amounts two
years ago, just before he went to Antarctica. But
they're still selling it. They're still selling
it. As a consequence, Freeman, who's been
publishing the book, the publisher, phoned the
other day and asked if I would now edit a series of
off-prints in a coherent group for them on the
natural history of marine organisms, you know,
putting a lot of them together as a package. And I
said then, hey, how's Wells Plankton and Mann
doing these days? He said, I got to. I got, I think, a
half cent for each one. I usually get a check for
$100 or $120 every year. It doesn't mean anything,
but they've been selling a lot of them. He said,
hey, still one of our best sellers, except they're
around $124,000.
So that's how that thing came about. And today, of
course, the Japanese and the Russians are fish and
krill in the Antarctic.
And El Sayed here has much more interest in the
Antarctic than I do, so he's got that end of the
scale. But I tell you, when I went to Europe trying
to convince the Norwegians, I wanted the
Norwegians, who were then the great whalers, to
give me one of their whale catchers and part of the
time on their factor ship to harvest krill. The man
radar, or sonar, was just coming in as a result of
its development during the war. And they were
using that to try to detect whales and the krill was
getting in their way. It was noise. And I learned
something. They said, You may not know it, but the
British owned all of the Norwegian wedding fleet.
So I went to England and got nowhere. They had money
coming in. They weren't interested in anything
else. That's when I realized that, although my
mother was British, that British don't have as
much imagination in financial things that you
would like
sometimes. I think this has been borne out in more
ways than one. They just turned me down flat and
said, it's a dream. And we've got the real thing
now. So they entertained me royally, but I never
got into it. But now it is important and may prove to
be even more important. What we need now, of
course, is much more in the way of studies than
we've ever had before. There are men who knew so
much more than I did about this. I visited with them
at the National Oceanographic Institute at
Wormley. in England and the British Museum and so
on. But no one of them then saw this potential. They
didn't see it at all. For some reason, I don't know.
But we need studies now to really be sure how much
that stock can sustain because it is good food. And
there's no reason in the world why It shouldn't
have really, and what I tried to entice them with,
should become a gourmet
food. By the way, have you seen this book by Muriel
L. Gouberlet in 1964 on explorers of the sea,
famous oceanographic expeditions? Yes. My wife
wanted to be sure that you saw that. We have not read
it. Well, she thought maybe you might get some
ideas out of it. At any rate, she thought it was also
interesting that we both came up with this idea
that a hundred years ago, on the 24th of May, the
Challenger expedition returned to England after
its three and a half year of launch. And that is darn
interesting. You can have that if you want. I think
I had the book in my office, but just in case I don't,
Monty may have to pick it up to look at it. Uh... I
want to also know about the work with the ONR in 1956
and in 1964. Did you have two separate grants from
the Office of Labor Research? Oh, yeah, a long
period of time I had grants. Well,
there's a book being written now on the history of
scuba diving in the United States. And they're
going to start the history of 1950. But actually,
it started earlier than that.
Outside of the military, I think I bought the first
scuba gear that was used in this country. And
here's the way it came about. And that's why the
Navy got involved.
I was then editor of a very Mickey Mouse small
journal that had had a long and distinguished
history, but was getting a little out of date. It
didn't have enough budget to compete. It was
called the Journal of Entomology and Zoology,
which had been started in the turn of the century at
Pomona College. And there were a lot of good things
that had been published in it. in a period of time,
some 50 years. But it had been particularly
important for exchanging with European
journals, free exchange. And the library at
Pomona College had more foreign journals than
many universities.
But as an editor of that magazine, I was approached
one day by a Frenchman by the name of Rene of
Westwood. village outside of UCLA who had a big
sporting goods store. He was a friend of Jacques
Cousteau. And Jacques had asked him if he would
merchandise this thing that was called the
Aqualon. It was then the regulator was fabricated
in France and the tanks in Canada. This man phoned
me, this Rene, and said, would I carry an
advertisement in the journal for his aqualung?
And I said, gee, what is it? He said, it is an
underwater breathing apparatus. It was not then
called scuba.
And it will permit one to stay underwater for
several minutes, up to half an hour, depending on
depth. free diving. So I said, well, I certainly
couldn't do that. But click, click, click, in my
mind was, man, if you could really do this, how nice
it would be in summer sessions when I needed marine
specimens to work with and experimental
embryology and so on, to be able to go out any time
and not wait for a low tide. So I said, I will carry
your ad if and only if I approve of this device in the
swimming pool. at Pomona College. So he said, I'll
be out the next day before he came. I strapped one of
these things on, and I saw the potential was
magnificent. And so I bought it and began using it
at Corona Del Mar. I used it about the last of my life
several times because, of course, you had no buddy
system. Nobody else had one around. That was 1948.
Fortunately, I advertised it in the journal, and
the first ad appeared in 48, 49 academic year.
Well, I then began going off the coast. And I found
things in the underwater environment that I just
didn't know existed there. And nobody else did,
even though many good biologists had been along
that coast for 50 years. I saw things they had never
seen, didn't even think existed there. So I wrote
the Office of Naval Research about this. And
Sidney Galler, who is now, I think, one of the
assistant secretaries of commerce, was then in
head of the biological section of the Office of
Native Research. And I said, you know, I think this
has great potential. And I have a problem I would
like to work on there. There's some rock material
under there that I'd really like to examine very
thoroughly. and this makes it possible to do it
quantitatively, and so on. So he came out to
California, and we discussed this, and they gave
me grants. And then I went on with that for some
time. And later,
when I came here, when I went to NSF, of course, it
all had to stop. When I came here, the Navy, not only
gave me grants to go on with that, but they also gave
me grants to work in the deep sea. And they did this
until
it became very evident that the action in the
United States was going to be on the Commonwealth
shelf. Everyone was coming to be interested in the
Commonwealth shelf. So I'm very glad I had my
chance in the deep sea, and this book I look upon as
being something that I've just got to put, because
14 or 15 cruises
on the Gulf of Mexico
can't go without some kind of recording. But it's a
hell of a job getting all this stuff identified.
There's no way to do it easily and quickly. But my
wife and I have had, as a result, we've picked
certain groups of organisms that we had to work
with. And we've made a lot of good friends around
the world as a result. In Japan, France, we've had
French scientists visiting us, Japanese and so
on, as a result of this work. We specialized in the
crustaceans. It's given my wife something she
likes to do. And so we are really most appreciative
of the great support that ONR gave us. I hate to see
ONR go down the tubes. Well, is ONR going down?
Well, it's hard to say. They certainly, I have not
felt in good confidence I could ask them for any
more money for seven years. But part of the reason
for that was that Senator I've forgotten
who it is now. I wanted to say Magnuson, but it's not
Magnuson. From Montana, whatever his name is.
Mahoney? No, not Mahoney. It begins with M,
though. At any rate, he indicated that ONR should
not support any but missionary research.
Research directed toward the mission of the Navy.
This came to be acoustics. And they asked me if I
could in any way turn my work into acoustics. And I
tried one year, and my heart wasn't in it. What is
acoustics? Transmission of sound in the sea and
those factors, biological and otherwise, that
cause aberrations in sound transmission.
But ONR has been cut down, and there's been some
long debate as to whether it would actually
continue. Part of the reason for the problem is
that the Navy wants to move that part of the Office
of Naval Research to Bay St. Louis, Mississippi.
And there's been a great fight against it. Whether
that will be done or not. Are you conversing with
them? Did you know this? You know NASA had that big
installation over there that they built and never
used? It's a gigantic installation. Magnificent
computer center. All the Washington people feel
it's in the backwash of the world, and they don't
want to go. So ONR may come to a gradual stop.